CGI - CUPS v1.1.21 - 06/29/2004
-------------------------------

This file describes the experimental scripting/CGI support
provided by CUPS starting with CUPS 1.1.19.

WARNING: CGI support is not complete; you may run into problems
and limitations in the implementation of CGI in CUPS that are
not present in full-featured web servers like Apache.


OVERVIEW OF CGI SUPPORT IN CUPS

CUPS has traditionally provided a dynamic web interface through
four CGI programs that are executed when users open special
directories on the CUPS server.  Each CGI performs
administration, class, job, and printer functions as directed by
the user, but the actual programs that are run and functions
that are available are limited to those that were originally
designed into the scheduler.

Starting with CUPS 1.1.19, support is now available for CGI
programs and specific scripting languages, currently Java, Perl,
PHP, and Python.  The interpreters for these languages are
currently configured at compile time.  Future versions may
expand the interface to allow for generic support of scripting
languages similar to the Apache "AddHandler" directive, but with
external programs instead of modules.

The following MIME types are reserved for the CGI support in
CUPS (the names have been chosen to mirror those used by
Apache):

    application/x-httpd-cgi      CGI script/program
    application/x-httpd-java     Java program
    application/x-httpd-perl     Perl script
    application/x-httpd-php      PHP script
    application/x-httpd-python   Python script

In order to enable the corresponding type, you must create a new
/etc/cups/cgi.types file which maps the filename extensions to
the appropriate MIME type, for example:

    application/x-httpd-cgi cgi
    application/x-httpd-php php

CGI scripts/programs (application/x-httpd-cgi) also must have
execution permissions to be treated as a CGI script or program.


LIMITATIONS

CUPS implements most of the CGI/1.1 specification, with the
following limitations:

    - No Location: redirection support.
    - No PATH_INFO or PATH_TRANSLATED support.
    - Limited HTTP field support; only the Content-Length
      (CONTENT_LENGTH), Cookie (HTTP_COOKIE), and User-Agent
      (HTTP_USER_AGENT) fields are placed in environment
      variables at this time.


REPORTING PROBLEMS

If you have problems, READ THE DOCUMENTATION FIRST!  If the
documentation does not solve your problems please send an email
to "cups-support@cups.org".  Include your operating system and
version, compiler and version, and any errors or problems you've
run into. The "/var/log/cups/error_log" file should also be sent,
as it often helps to determine the cause of your problem.

If you are running a version of Linux, be sure to provide the
Linux distribution you have, too.

Please note that the "cups-support@cups.org" email address goes
to the CUPS developers; they are busy people, so your email may
go unanswered for days or weeks.  In general, only general build
or distribution problems will actually get answered - for
end-user support see the "README.txt" for a summary of the
resources available.
