





INTERNET DRAFT                                             Roger K deBry
<draft-ietf-ipp-not-05.txt>                    Utah Valley State College
[Target Category: Informational]                             Harry Lewis
                                                         IBM Corporation
                                                   Tom Hastings (editor)
                                                       Xerox Corporation
                                                        January 23, 2001

   Internet Printing Protocol (IPP): Requirements for IPP Notifications
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.


STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026].  Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as  ''work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed as
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

ABSTRACT

   This document is one of a set of documents which together describe
   all aspects of a new Internet Printing Protocol (IPP). IPP is an
   application level protocol that can be used for distributed printing
   on the Internet. There are multiple parts to IPP, but the primary
   architectural components are the Model, the Protocol and an interface
   to Directory Services. This document provides a statement of the
   requirements for notifications as part of an IPP Service.











deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 1]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


   The full set of IPP documents include:

     Design Goals for an Internet Printing Protocol [RFC2567]
     Rationale for the Structure and Model and Protocol for the Internet
     Printing Protocol [RFC2568]
     Internet Printing Protocol/1.0: Model and Semantics [RFC2566]
     Internet Printing Protocol/1.0: Encoding and Transport [RFC2565]
     Internet Printing Protocol/1.0: Implementer's Guide [RFC 2639]
     Mapping between LPD and IPP Protocols [RFC2569]

   The 'Design Goals for an Internet Printing Protocol' document takes a
   broad look at distributed printing functionality, and it enumerates
   real-life scenarios that help to clarify the features that need to be
   included in a printing protocol for the Internet.  It identifies
   requirements for three types of users: end users, operators, and
   administrators.  It calls out a subset of end user requirements that
   are satisfied in IPP/1.0.  Operator and administrator requirements
   are out of scope for version 1.0.

   The 'Rationale for the Structure and Model and Protocol for the
   Internet Printing Protocol' document describes IPP from a high level
   view, defines a roadmap for the various documents that form the suite
   of IPP specifications, and gives background and rationale for the
   IETF working group's major decisions.

   The 'Internet Printing Protocol/1.0: Encoding and Transport' document
   is a formal mapping of the abstract operations and attributes defined
   in the model document onto HTTP/1.1.  It defines the encoding rules
   for a new Internet media type called 'application/ipp'.

   The 'Internet Printing Protocol/1.0: Implementer's Guide' document
   gives insight and advice to implementers of IPP clients and IPP
   objects.  It is intended to help them understand IPP/1.0 and some of
   the considerations that may assist them in the design of their client
   and/or IPP object implementations.  For example, a typical order of
   processing requests is given, including error checking.  Motivation
   for some of the specification decisions is also included.

   The 'Mapping between LPD and IPP Protocols' document gives some
   advice to implementers of gateways between IPP and LPD (Line Printer
   Daemon) implementations.

                             Table of Contents


   1 Scope ...........................................................4

   2 Terminology .....................................................4

   3 Scenarios .......................................................8


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 2]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


   4 Requirements ...................................................11

   5 Security considerations for IPP Notifications requirements .....13

   6 Internationalization Considerations ............................14

   7 IANA Considerations ............................................14

   8 References .....................................................14

   9 Author's Address ...............................................15

   10 Appendix A: Full Copyright Statement...........................16







































deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 3]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


1  Scope

   The scope of this requirements document covers functionality used by
   the following kinds of IPP Users: End Users, Print Administrators and
   Operators.

2  Terminology

   It is necessary to define a set of terms in order to be able to
   clearly express the requirements for notification services in an IPP
   System.

2.1 Job Submitting End User

   A human end user who submits a print job to an IPP Printer. This
   person may or may not be within the same security domain as the
   Printer. This person may or may not be geographically near the
   printer.

2.2 Administrator

   A human user who established policy for and configures the print
   system.

2.3 Operator

   A human user who carries out the policy established by the
   Administrator and controls the day to day running of the print
   system.

2.4 Job Submitting Application

   An application (for example, a batch application), acting on behalf
   of a Job Submitting End User, which submits a print job to an IPP
   Printer. The application may or may not be within the same security
   domain as the Printer. This application may or may not be
   geographically near the printer.

2.5 Security Domain

   For the purposes of this discussion, the set of network components
   which can communicate without going through a proxy or firewall. A
   security domain may be geographically very large, for example -
   anyplace within IBM.COM.

2.6 IPP Client

   The software component that sends IPP requests to an IPP Printer
   object and accepts IPP responses from an IPP Printer.



deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 4]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


2.7 Job Recipient

   A human who is the ultimate consumer of the print job. In many cases
   this will be the same person as the Job Submitting End User, but this
   need not always be the case. For example, if I use IPP to print a
   document on a printer in a business partner's office, I am the Job
   Submitting End User, while the person I intend the document for in my
   business partner's office is the Job Recipient.  Since one of the
   goals of IPP is to be able to print near the Job Recipient of the
   printed output, we would normally expect that person to be in the
   same security domain as, and geographically near, the Printer.
   However, this may not always be the case. For example, I submit a
   print job across the Internet to a Kinko's print shop. I am both the
   Submitting end User and the Job Recipient, but I am neither near nor
   in the same security domain as the Printer.

2.8 Job Recipient Proxy

   A person acting on behalf of the Job Recipient.  In particular, the
   Job Recipient Proxy physically picks up the printed document from the
   Printer, if the Job Recipient cannot perform that function. The Proxy
   is by definition geographically near and in the same security domain
   as the printer. For example, I submit a print job from home to be
   printed on a printer at work. I'd like my secretary to pick up the
   print job and put it on my desk. In this case,  I am acting as both
   Job Submitting End User and Job Recipient. My secretary is acting as
   a Job Recipient Proxy.

2.9 Notification Subscriber

   A client that requests the IPP Printer to send Event Notifications to
   one or more Notification Recipients.  A Notification Subscriber may
   be a Job Submitting End User or an End User, an Operator, or an
   Administrator that is not submitting a job.

2.10 Notification Source

   The entity that sends Event Notifications.

2.11 Notification Recipient

   The entity that receives IPP Notifications about Job and/or Printer
   events.  A Notification Recipient may be a: Job Submitting End User,
   Job Submitting Application, Job Recipient, Job Recipient Proxy,
   Operator, or Administrator, etc., and their representatives or log
   file or usage statistics gathering application or other active or
   passive entities.

2.12 Notification Recipient Agent



deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 5]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


   A program which receives Event Notifications on behalf of the
   Notification Recipient. The agent may take some action on behalf of
   the recipient, forward the notification to the recipient via some
   alternative means (for example, page the recipient), or queue the
   notification for later retrieval by the recipient.

2.13 Event

   A Event is some occurrence (either expected or unexpected) within the
   printing system of a change of state, condition, or configuration of
   a Job or Printer object.

2.14 Event Notification

   When an event occurs, an Event Notification is generated that fully
   describes the event (what the event was, where it occurred, when it
   occurred, etc.).  Event Notifications are delivered to all the
   Notification Recipients that are subscribed to that Event, if any.
   The Event Notification is delivered to the address of the
   Notification Recipient using the notification delivery method defined
   in the subscription.  However, an Event Notification is sent ONLY if
   there is a corresponding subscription.

2.15 Notification Subscription

   A Notification Subscription is a request by a Notification Subscriber
   to the IPP Printer to send Event Notifications to specified
   Notification Recipient(s) when the event occur.

2.16 Notification Attributes

   IPP Objects (for example, a print job) from which notification are
   being sent may have attributes associated with them. A user may want
   to have one or more of these associated attributes returned along
   with a particular notification. In general, these may include any
   attribute associated with the object emitting the notification.
   Examples include:

     number-of-intervening jobs
     job-k-octets
     job-k-octets processed
     job impressions
     job-impressions-interpreted
     job-impressions-completed
     impressionsCompletedCurrentCopy (job MIB)
        sheetCompletedCopyNumber (job MIB)
        sheetsCompletedDocumentNumber (job MIB)
        Copies-requested
        Copy-type
        Output-destination


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 6]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


        Job-state-reasons
        Job ID
        Printer URI
        Subscription ID (for job independent subscription)

2.17 Notification Delivery Method (or Delivery Method for short)

   Event Notifications are delivered using a method, such as email,
   TCP/IP, etc.

2.18 Immediate Notification

   Notifications sent to the Notification Recipient or the Notification
   Recipient's agent in such a way that the notification arrives
   immediately , within the limits of common addressing, routing,
   network congestion and quality of service.

2.19 Store and Forward Notification

   Notifications which are not necessarily delivered to Notification
   Recipients immediately, but are queued for delivery by some
   intermediate network application, for later retrieval. Email is an
   example of a store and forward notification delivery method.

2.20 Reliable Delivery of Notifications

   Notifications which are delivered by a reliable delivery of packets
   or character stream, with acknowledgment and retry, such that
   delivery of the notification is guaranteed within some determinate
   time limits. For example, if the Notification Recipient has logged
   off and gone home for the day, an immediate notification cannot be
   guaranteed to be delivered, even when sent over a reliable transport,
   because there is nothing there to catch it. Guaranteed delivery
   requires both store and forward notification and a reliable
   transport.

2.21 Notification over Unreliable Transport

   Notifications are delivered via the fundamental transport address and
   routing framework, but no acknowledgment or retry is required.
   Process to process communications, if involved, are unconstrained.


2.22 Human Consumable Notification

   Notifications which are intended to be consumed by human end users
   only.  Email would be an example of a Human consumable notification,
   though it could also contain Machine Consumable Notification.

2.23 Machine Consumable Notification


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 7]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001



   Notifications which are intended for consumption by a program only,
   such as an IPP Client. Machine Consumable notifications may not
   contain human readable information. Do we need both human and
   machine? Machine readable is intended for application to application
   only.  The Notification Recipient could process the machine readable
   Event Notification into human readable format.

2.24 Mixed Notification

   A mixed notification contains both Human Consumable and Machine
   Consumable information.

3  Scenarios

   1.I am sitting in my office and submit a print job to the printer
     down the hall. I am in the same security domain as the printer and
     of course, geographically near.  I want to know immediately when
     my print job will be completed (or if there is a problem) because
     the document I am working on is urgent. I submit the print job
     with the following attributes:

     .  Notification Recipient - me
     .  Notification Events - all
     .  Notification Attributes - job-state-reason
     .  Notification Type - immediate
         
   2.I am working from home and submit a print job to the same printer
     as in the previous example. However, since I am not at work, I
     cannot physically get the print file or do anything with it. It
     can wait until I get to work this afternoon. However, I'd like my
     secretary to pick up the output and put it on my desk so it
     doesn't get lost or miss-filed. I'd also like a store and forward
     notification sent to my email so that when I get to work I can
     tell if there was a problem with the print job. I submit a print
     job with the following attributes:

     .  Notification Recipient - my secretary
     .  Notification Events - print complete
     .  Notification Type - immediate
      
     .  Notification Recipient - me
     .  Notification Events - print complete
     .  Notification Attributes - impressions completed
     .  Notification Type - store and forward

   3.I am sitting in my office and submit a print job to a client at an
     engineering firm we work with on a daily basis. The engineering
     firm is in Belgium. I would like my client to know when the print
     job is complete, so that she can pick it up from the printer in


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 8]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


     her building.  It is important that she review it right away and
     get her comments back to me. I submit the print job with the
     following attributes:


     .  Notification Recipient - client at engineering firm
     .  Notification Events - print complete
     .  Notification Type - immediate
     .  Notification Language - French

   4.I am in a hotel room and send a print job to a Kinko's store in
     the town I am working in, in order to get a printed report for the
     meeting I am attending in the morning.  Since I'm going out to
     dinner after I get this job submitted, an immediate notification
     won't do me much good. However, I'd like to check in the morning
     before I drive to the Kinko's store to see if the file has been
     printed. An email notification is sufficient for this purpose. I
     submit the print job with the following attributes:

     .  Notification Recipient - me
     .  Notification Events - print complete
     .  Notification Type - store and forward

   5.I am printing a large, complex print file. I want to have some
     immediate feedback on the progress of the print job as it prints.
     I submit the print job with the following attributes:

     .  Notification Recipient - me
     .  Notification Type - immediate
     .  Notification Events - all state transitions
     .  Notification Attributes - impression completed

   6.I am an operator and my duties is to keep the printer running.  I
     subscribe independently from a job submission so that my
     subscription outlasts any particular job.  I subscribe with the
     following attributes:

     .  Notification Recipient - me
     .  Notification Type - immediate
     .  Notification Events - all Printer state transitions
     .  Notification Attributes - Printer state, printer state reasons,
        device powering up, device powering down.

   7.I am a usage statistics gathering application. I subscribe
     independently from a job submission so that my subscription
     outlasts any particular job.  My subscription may persists across
     power cycles.  I subscribe with the following attributes:

     .  Notification Recipient - me
     .  Notification Type - immediate


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001             [Page 9]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


     .  Notification Events - job completion
     .  Notification Attributes - impression completed, sheets
        completed, time submitted, time started, time completed, job
        owner, job size in octets, etc.

   8.I am a client application program that displays a list of jobs
     currently queued for printing on a printer.  I display the "job-
     name", "job-state", "job-state-reasons", "page-count", and
     "intervening-jobs" either for the user's jobs or for all jobs.
     The window displaying the job list remains open for an independent
     amount of time, and it is desired that it represent the current
     state of the queue.  It is desired that the application only need
     to perform a slow poll in order to recover from any missed
     notifications.  So the event delivery mechanism provides the means
     to update the screen on all needed changes, including querying for
     some attributes that may not be delivered in the Notification.

   9.I am a client application program that displays a list of
     printers.  For each Printer I display the current state and
     configuration.  The window displaying the printer list remains
     open for an independent amount of time, and it is desired that it
     represent the current state of each printer.  It is desired that
     the application only need to perform a slow poll in order to
     recover from any missed notifications.  So the event delivery
     mechanism provides the means to update the screen on all needed
     changes, including querying for some attributes that may not be
     delivered in the Notification.

   10.    I am an IPP Server that controls one or more devices and
     implements an IPP Printer object to represent each device.  I want
     to support IPP Notification for each of the IPP Printer objects
     that I implement.  Many of these devices do not support
     notification (or IPP).  So I need to support the IPP Notification
     semantics specified for each IPP Printer object myself on behalf
     of each of the devices that each of the IPP Printer objects
     represent.  When I accept IPP job creation requests, I convert the
     request to what the device will accept.  In some cases, I must
     poll the devices in order to be informed of their job and device
     state and state changes in order to be able to send IPP
     Notifications to subscribed Notification Recipients.

   11.    I am an IPP Server that controls one or more devices and
     implements an IPP Printer object to represent each device.  I want
     to support IPP Notification for each of the IPP Printer objects
     that I implement.  These devices all support IPP, including IPP
     Notification.  I would like the design choice for supporting IPP
     Notification for these IPP Printer objects that I implement either
     (1) by forwarding the notification to the IPP Printers that I
     alone control and have them send the notifications to the intended
     Notification Recipients without my involvement or (2) replace the


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001            [Page 10]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


     notification submitted with the Job to indicate me as the
     Notification Recipient and I will in turn forward Notifications to
     the Notification Recipients requested by my clients.  Most of the
     rest of the contents of the IPP Job that I send to the IPP
     Printers that I control will be the same as the IPP Job that I
     receive from my IPP clients.

   12.    I am an IPP Server that controls one or more devices and
     implements an IPP Printer object to represent each device.  I want
     to support IPP Notification for each of the IPP Printer objects
     that I implement.  These devices all support IPP, including IPP
     Notification.  Because these IPP Printers MAY also be being
     controlled by other servers (using IPP or other protocols), I only
     want job events for the jobs that I send, but do want Printer
     events all the time, so that I can show proper Printer state to my
     clients.  So I subscribe to these IPP Printers for Printer events
     with a long standing subscription with myself to as the
     Notification Recipient.  When I get a Job Creation request, I
     decide to which IPP Printer to send the job.  When I do so, I also
     add a job subscription for Job events with me as the Notification
     Recipient to the job's job subscriptions supplied by my clients
     (this usage is called "piggy-backing").  These IPP Printers
     automatically remove their job subscriptions when the job
     completes as for all job subscriptions so that I no longer get Job
     events when my jobs are completed.

4  Requirements

   The following requirements are intended to be met by the IPP
   Notification specification (not the implementation).  The resulting
   IPP Notification Specification document:

   1.must indicate which of these requirements are REQUIRED and which
     are OPTIONAL for a conforming implementation to support.  See
     [RFC2911] section 12.1 for the definition of these important
     conformance terms.

   2.must be designed to that an IPP Printer can transparently  support
     the IPP Notification semantics using third party notification
     services that exist today or that may be standardized in the
     future.

   3.must define means for a Job Submitting End User to specify zero or
     more Notification Recipients when submitting a print job. A
     Submitter will not be able to prevent out of band subscriptions
     from authorized persons, such as Operators.

   4.must define means when specifying a Notification Recipient, for a
     Notification Subscriber to be able to specify one or more
     notification events for that Notification Recipient, subject to


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001            [Page 11]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


     administrative and security policy restrictions.  Any of the
     following constitute Job or Printer Events that a Job Submitting
     End User can specify notifications be sent for:
        . Any standard Printer MIB alert (i.e. device alerts) (critical
          and warning?) (state change notifications)?
        . Job Received (transition from Unknown to Pending)
        . Job Started (Transition from Pending to Processing)
        . Page Complete (Page is stacked)
        . Collated Copy Complete (last sheet of collated copy is
          stacked)
        . Job Complete (transition from Processing or  Processing-
          stopped to Completed)
        . Job aborted (transition from Pending, Pending-held,
          Processing, or Processing-stopped to Aborted)
        . Job canceled (transition from Pending, Pending-held,
          Processing, or Processing-held to Canceled)
        . Other job state changes like 'paused', purged?
        . Device problems for which the job is destined
        . Job (interpreter) issues


   5.must define how an End User or Operator subscribes for:
        . Any set of Job Events for a specific job.
        . Any set of Printer Events while a specific job is not
          complete.

   6.must define how an End User or Operator subscribes for the
     following without having to submit a Job:
        . Any set of Printer Events for a defined period.
        . Any set of Job Events for all jobs with no control over which
          jobs.

   7.must define how the Notification Subscriber is able to specify
     either immediate or store and forward notification independently
     for each Notification Recipient.  The means may be explicit, or
     implied by the method of delivery chosen by the Job Submitting End
     User.
    
   8.must define common delivery methods, e.g. email, must be defined.

   9.must define how an IPP Printer validates its ability to deliver an
     Event using the specified delivery scheme.  If it does not support
     the specified scheme, or the specified scheme is invalid for some
     reason, then the IPP Printer accepts and performs the request
     anyway and responds indicating the unsupported attribute values.
     There is no requirement for the IPP Printer receiving the print
     request to validate the identity of an Notification Recipient, nor
     the ability of the system to deliver an event to that recipient as
     requested (for example, if the Notification Recipient is not at
     work today).


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001            [Page 12]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001



   10.    must define a class of IPP event notification delivery methods
     which can flow through corporate firewalls. However, an IPP
     printer need not test to guarantee delivery of the notification
     through a firewall before accepting a print job.
   11.    may define means for delivering a notification to the
     submitting client when the delivery of an event notification to a
     specified Notification Recipient fails. Fall back means of
     subscribers determining if notifications have failed, i.e.
     polling, may be provided.

   12.    must define a mechanism for localizing Human Consumable
     notifications by the Notification Source.

   13.    may define a way to specify whether or not event delivery
     requires acknowledgement back to the Notification Source.

   14.    There must be a mechanism defined so that job independent
     subscriptions do not become stale and do not require human
     intervention to remove stale subscriptions.  However, stale must
     not be the inability to deliver an Event Notification , since
     temporary Notification delivery problems must be tolerated.

   15.    A mechanism must be defined so that an Event Subscriber is
     able to add an Event Subscription to a Job after the Job has been
     submitted.

   16.    A mechanism must be defined so that a client is able to cancel
     an Event Subscription on a job or printer after the job has been
     submitted.

   17.    A mechanism must be defined so that a client can obtain the
     set of current Subscriptions.

5  Security considerations for IPP Notifications requirements

   By far the biggest security concern is the abuse of notification:
   sending unwanted notifications to third parties (i.e., spam).  The
   problem is made worse by notification addresses that may be
   redistributed to multiple parties (e.g. mailing lists).  There exist
   scenarios where third party notification is required (see Scenario #2
   and #3).  The fully secure solution would require active agreement of
   all recipients before sending out anything.  However, requirement #9
   ("There is no requirement for IPP Printer receiving the print request
   to validate the identity of an event recipient") argues against this.
   Certain systems may decide to disallow third party notifications (a
   traditional fax model).

   Clients submitting notification requests to the IPP Printer has the
   same security issues as submitting an IPP/1.1 print job request.  The


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001            [Page 13]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


   same mechanisms used by IPP/1.1 can therefore be used by the client
   notification submission.  Operations that require authentication can
   use the HTTP authentication.  Operations that require privacy can use
   the HTTP/TLS privacy.

   The notification access control model should be similar to the IPP
   access control model.  Creating a notification subscription is
   associated with a user.  Only the creator or an operator can cancel
   the subscription.  The system may limit the listing of items to only
   those items owned by the user.  Some subscriptions (e.g. those that
   have a lifetime longer than a job) can be done only by privileged
   users (operators and/or administrators), if that is the authorization
   policy.

   The standard security concerns (delivery to the right user, privacy
   of content, tamper proof content) apply to the notification delivery.
   IPP should use the security mechanism of the delivery method used.
   Some delivery mechanisms are more secure than others.  Therefore,
   sensitive notifications should use the delivery method that has the
   strongest security.

6  Internationalization Considerations

   The Human Consumable notification must be localized to the natural
   language and charset that Notification Subscriber specifies within
   the choice of natural languages and charsets that the IPP Printer
   supports.

   The Machine Consumable notification data uses the 'application/ipp'
   MIME media type.  It contains some attributes whose text values are
   required to be in the natural language and charset that the
   Notification Subscriber specifies within the choice of natural
   languages and charsets that the IPP Printer supports.  See [RFC2566].

7  IANA Considerations

   There will be some notification delivery methods registered with IANA
   for use in URLs.  These will be defined in other documents.

8  References

   [RFC2565]
     Herriot, R., Butler, S., Moore, P., Tuner, R., "Internet Printing
     Protocol/1.0: Encoding and Transport", RFC 2565, April 1999.

   [RFC2566]
     R. deBry, T. Hastings, R. Herriot, S. Isaacson, P. Powell,
     "Internet Printing Protocol/1.0: Model and Semantics", RFC 2566,
     April 1999.



deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001            [Page 14]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001


   [RFC2567]
     Wright, D., "Design Goals for an Internet Printing Protocol",
     draft-ietf-ipp-req-03.txt, November, 1998.

   [RFC2568]
     Zilles, S., "Rationale for the Structure and Model and Protocol for
     the Internet Printing Protocol", draft-ietf-ipp-rat-04.txt,
     November, 1998.

   [RFC2569]
     Herriot, R., Hastings, T., Jacobs, N., Martin, J., "Mapping between
     LPD and IPP Protocols", draft-ietf-ipp-lpd-ipp-map-05.txt, November
     1998.

   [RFC2639]
      T. Hastings, C. Manros. "Internet Printing Protocol/1.0:
     Implementer's Guide", RFC 2639, July 1999.

   [RFC2911]
     deBry, R., , Hastings, T., Herriot, R., Isaacson, S., Powell, P.,
     "Internet Printing Protocol/1.1: Model and Semantics", RFC 2911,
     September 2000.

9  Author's Address

     Harry Lewis
     HUC/003G
     IBM Corporation
     P.O. Box 1900
     Boulder, CO 80301-9191

     Phone: (303) 924-5337
     Fax: (303) 924-9889
     e-mail: harryl@us.ibm.com

     Roger deBry
     Utah Valley State College
     Orem, UT 84058

     Phone: (801) 222-8000
     e-mail: debryro@uvsc.edu

     Tom Hastings (editor)
     Xerox Corporation
     737 Hawaii St.  ESAE 231
     El Segundo, CA   90245

     Phone: 310-333-6413
     Fax:   310-333-5514
     e-mail: hastings@cp10.es.xerox.com


deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001            [Page 15]


INTERNET DRAFT    IPP/1.1: Notification Requirements   January 23, 2001



     IPP Mailing List:  ipp@pwg.org
     IPP Mailing List Subscription: ipp-request@pwg.org
     IPP Web Page:  http://www.pwg.org/ipp/

10 Appendix A: Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998,1999,2000,2001). All Rights
   Reserved


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
















deBry, Lewis, Hastings       Expires July 23, 2001            [Page 16]
